Create 2020-04-22-two-phased-canary-rollout-with-gloo.md (#19979)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2020-03-30-two-phased-canary-rollout-with-gloo.md

---

> title: " Two-phased Canary Rollout with Open Source Gloo "

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
title: "Two-phased Canary Rollout with Open Source Gloo"
```

date: 2020-03-30
slug: two-phased-canary-rollout-with-gloo
url: /blog/2020/03/Two-phased-Canary-Rollout-With-Gloo
---

> 

Reviewer: On this blog, posts usually show the author name and optionally their organization.

* In the second phase, we'll progressively shift traffic to the new version, allowing us to monitor the new version under load, and eventually, decommission the old version. 

To keep it simple, we're going to focus on designing the workflow using [open source Gloo](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo), and we're going to deploy the gateway and 
application to Kubernetes. At the end, we'll talk about a few extensions and advanced topics that could be interesting to explore in a follow up.  

## Initial setup

To start, we need a Kubernetes cluster. This example doesn't take advantage of any cloud specific 
features, and can be run against a local test cluster such as [minikube](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-minikube/). 
This post assumes a basic understanding of Kubernetes and how to interact with it using `kubectl`. 

We'll install the latest [open source Gloo](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo) to the `gloo-system` namespace and deploy 
 version `v1` of an example application to the `echo` namespace. We'll expose this application outside the cluster 
 by creating a route in Gloo, to end up with a picture like this: 

> ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/1-setup/setup.png)

Reviewer: 1. This image should have an alt attribute.
2. Can you copy the image into the repo so that it's served via the content CDN and the image is in source control?

### Deploying Gloo

We'll install gloo with the `glooctl` command line tool, which we can download and add to the `PATH` with the following 
commands:

```bash
curl -sL https://run.solo.io/gloo/install | sh
export PATH=$HOME/.gloo/bin:$PATH
```

Now, you should be able to run `glooctl version` to see that it is installed correctly:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

➜ glooctl version
Client: {"version":"1.3.15"}
Server: version undefined, could not find any version of gloo running
```

Now we can install the gateway to our cluster with a simple command:

```bash
glooctl install gateway
```

The console should indicate the install finishes successfully:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

Creating namespace gloo-system... Done.
Starting Gloo installation...

Gloo was successfully installed!

```

Before long, we can see all the Gloo pods running in the `gloo-system` namespace:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code (the first line is shell plus a prompt though)

Author: thanks - i went and just made these all plain code blocks. open to other ideas for presenting the command + output, I went with this one and tried to use it everywhere

conventions:
* We'll include the version in the deployment name so we can run two versions of the application 
side-by-side and manage their lifecycle differently. 
* We'll label pods with an app label (`app: echo`) and a version label (`version: v1`) to help with our canary rollout. 
* We'll deploy a single Kubernetes `Service` for the application to set up networking. Instead of updating 
this or using multiple services to manage routing to different versions, we'll manage the rollout with Gloo configuration. 

The following is our `v1` echo application: 

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: echo-v1
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: echo
      version: v1
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: echo
        version: v1
    spec:
      containers:
        # Shout out to our friends at Hashi for this useful test server
        - image: hashicorp/http-echo
          args:
            - "-text=version:v1"
            - -listen=:8080
          imagePullPolicy: Always
          name: echo-v1
          ports:
            - containerPort: 8080
```

> And here is the `echo` Kubernetes `Service` object:

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
And here is the `echo` Service, a Kubernetes object:
```
?

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: echo
spec:
  ports:
    - port: 80
      targetPort: 8080
      protocol: TCP
  selector:
    app: echo
```

> For convenience, we've published this yaml in a repo so we can deploy it with the following command:

Reviewer: I suggest:
```suggestion
For convenience, we've published this manifest so you can deploy it with the following command:
```

and also that you put it in the website repo. See https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/write-new-topic/#including-code-from-another-file

(you can use the website repo to store the manifest even if you decide not to use a `codenew` shortcode).

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/1-setup/echo.yaml
```

We should see the following output:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

namespace/echo created
deployment.apps/echo-v1 created
service/echo created
```

And we should be able to see all the resources healthy in the `echo` namespace:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

        - keys:
            - version
```

Here, we're setting up subsets based on the `version` label. We don't have to use this in our routes, but later
we'll start to use it to support our canary workflow. 

We can now create a route to this upstream in Gloo by defining a 
[Virtual Service](https://docs.solo.io/gloo/latest/introduction/architecture/concepts/#virtual-services):

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.solo.io/v1
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: echo
  namespace: gloo-system
spec:
  virtualHost:
    domains:
      - '*'
    routes:
      - matchers:
          - prefix: /
        routeAction:
          single:
            upstream:
              name: echo
              namespace: gloo-system
```

We can apply these resources with the following commands:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/1-setup/upstream.yaml
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/1-setup/vs.yaml
```

Once we apply these two resources, we can start to send traffic to the application through Gloo:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

of the application. In this demo, we'll use a header `stage: canary` to trigger routing to the new service, though in 
practice it may be desirable to make this decision based on another part of the request, such as a claim in a verified JWT. 

In the second phase, we've already established correctness, so we are ready to shift all of the traffic over to the new 
version of the application. We'll configure weighted destinations, and shift the traffic while monitoring certain business 
metrics to ensure the service quality remains at acceptable levels. Once 100% of the traffic is shifted to the new version, 
the old version can be decommissioned. 

In practice, it may be desirable to only use one of the phases for testing, in which case the other phase can be 
skipped. 

## Phase 1: Initial canary rollout of v2

In this phase, we'll deploy `v2`, and then use a header `stage: canary` to start routing a small amount of specific 
traffic to the new version. We'll use this header to perform some basic smoke testing and make sure `v2` is working the 
way we'd expect:

> ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/2-initial-subset-routing-to-v2/subset-routing.png)

Reviewer: 1. This image should have an alt attribute.
2. Can you copy the image into the repo so that it's served via the content CDN and the image is in source control?

### Setting up subset routing

Before deploying our `v2` service, we'll update our virtual service to only route to pods that have the subset label 
`version: v1`, using a Gloo feature called [subset routing](https://docs.solo.io/gloo/latest/guides/traffic_management/destination_types/subsets/). 

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.solo.io/v1
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: echo
  namespace: gloo-system
spec:
  virtualHost:
    domains:
      - '*'
    routes:
      - matchers:
          - prefix: /
        routeAction:
          single:
            upstream:
              name: echo
              namespace: gloo-system
            subset:
              values:
                version: v1
```

We can apply them to the cluster with the following commands:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/2-initial-subset-routing-to-v2/vs-1.yaml
```

The application should continue to function as before:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

➜ curl $(glooctl proxy url)/
version:v1
```

### Deploying echo v2

Now we can safely deploy `v2` of the echo application:

```yaml
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: echo-v2
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: echo
      version: v2
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: echo
        version: v2
    spec:
      containers:
        - image: hashicorp/http-echo
          args:
            - "-text=version:v2"
            - -listen=:8080
          imagePullPolicy: Always
          name: echo-v2
          ports:
            - containerPort: 8080
```

We can deploy with the following command:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/2-initial-subset-routing-to-v2/echo-v2.yaml
```

Since our gateway is configured to route specifically to the `v1` subset, this should have no effect. However, it does enable 
`v2` to be routable from the gateway if the `v2` subset is configured for a route. 

Make sure `v2` is running before moving on:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

➜ kubectl get pod -n echo
NAME                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
echo-v1-66dbfffb79-2qw86   1/1     Running   0          5m25s
echo-v2-86584fbbdb-slp44   1/1     Running   0          93s
```

The application should continue to function as before:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

➜ curl $(glooctl proxy url)/
version:v1
```

### Adding a route to v2 for canary testing

We'll route to the `v2` subset when the `stage: canary` header is supplied on the request. If the header isn't 
provided, we'll continue to route to the `v1` subset as before.  

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.solo.io/v1
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: echo
  namespace: gloo-system
spec:
  virtualHost:
    domains:
      - '*'
    routes:
      - matchers:
          - headers:
              - name: stage
                value: canary
            prefix: /
        routeAction:
          single:
            upstream:
              name: echo
              namespace: gloo-system
            subset:
              values:
                version: v2
      - matchers:
          - prefix: /
        routeAction:
          single:
            upstream:
              name: echo
              namespace: gloo-system
            subset:
              values:
                version: v1

> ```

Reviewer: I recommend copying this manifest into the repo, as per an earlier comment.

We can deploy with the following command:

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/2-initial-subset-routing-to-v2/vs-2.yaml
```

### Canary testing

Now that we have this route, we can do some testing. First let's ensure that the existing route is working as expected:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code

➜ curl $(glooctl proxy url)/
version:v1
```

And now we can start to canary test our new application version:

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code

          multi:
            destinations:
              - destination:
                  upstream:
                    name: echo
                    namespace: gloo-system
                  subset:
                    values:
                      version: v1
                weight: 100
              - destination:
                  upstream:
                    name: echo
                    namespace: gloo-system
                  subset:
                    values:
                      version: v2
                weight: 0

```

We can apply this virtual service update to the cluster with the following commands:
```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/3-progressive-traffic-shift-to-v2/vs-1.yaml
```

Now the cluster looks like this, for any request that doesn't have the `stage: canary` header:

![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/3-progressive-traffic-shift-to-v2/init-traffic-shift.png)

With the initial weights, we should see the gateway continue to serve `v1` for all traffic.

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/3-progressive-traffic-shift-to-v2/vs-2.yaml
```

Now when we send traffic to the gateway, we should see half of the requests return `version:v1` and the 
other half return `version:v2`. 

```bash
➜ curl $(glooctl proxy url)/
version:v1
➜ curl $(glooctl proxy url)/
version:v2
➜ curl $(glooctl proxy url)/
version:v1
```

In practice, during this process it's likely you'll be monitoring some performance and business metrics 
to ensure the traffic shift isn't resulting in a decline in the overall quality of service. We can even 
leverage operators like [Flagger](https://github.com/weaveworks/flagger) to help automate this Gloo 
workflow. Gloo Enterprise integrates with your metrics backend and provides out of the box and dynamic, 
upstream-based dashboards that can be used to monitor the health of the rollout. 
We will save these topics for a future post on advanced canary testing use cases with Gloo. 

### Finishing the rollout

We will continue adjusting weights until eventually, all of the traffic is now being routed to `v2`:

> ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/3-progressive-traffic-shift-to-v2/final-shift.png)

Reviewer: 1. This image should have an alt attribute.
2. Can you copy the image into the repo so that it's served via the content CDN and the image is in source control?

              name: echo
              namespace: gloo-system
            subset:
              values:
                version: v2
      - matchers:
          - prefix: /
        routeAction:
          multi:
            destinations:
              - destination:
                  upstream:
                    name: echo
                    namespace: gloo-system
                  subset:
                    values:
                      version: v1
                # No traffic will be sent to v1 anymore
                weight: 0
              - destination:
                  upstream:
                    name: echo
                    namespace: gloo-system
                  subset:
                    values:
                      version: v2
                # Now all the traffic will be routed to v2
                weight: 100
```

We can apply that to the cluster with the following command: 
```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/3-progressive-traffic-shift-to-v2/vs-3.yaml
```

Now when we send traffic to the gateway, we should see all of the requests return `version:v2`. 

> ```bash

Reviewer: This isn't bash code.

conducted load and performance tests by progressively shifting traffic to the new version, and finished 
the rollout. The only remaining task is to clean up our `v1` resources. 

First, we'll clean up our routes. We'll leave the subset specified on the route so we are all setup for future upgrades. 

```yaml
apiVersion: gateway.solo.io/v1
kind: VirtualService
metadata:
  name: echo
  namespace: gloo-system
spec:
  virtualHost:
    domains:
      - '*'
    routes:
      - matchers:
          - prefix: /
        routeAction:
          single:
            upstream:
              name: echo
              namespace: gloo-system
            subset:
              values:
                version: v2
```

We can apply this update with the following command: 

```bash
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/4-decommissioning-v1/vs.yaml
```

And we can delete the `v1` deployment, which is no longer serving any traffic. 
            
```bash
kubectl delete deploy -n echo echo-v1
```

Now our cluster looks like this:

> ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/4-decommissioning-v1/end-state.png)

Reviewer: 1. This image should have an alt attribute.
2. Can you copy the image into the repo so that it's served via the content CDN and the image is in source control?

And requests to the gateway return this:

```bash
➜ curl $(glooctl proxy url)/
version:v2
```

We have now completed our two-phased canary rollout of an application update using Gloo!

### Checking our work

Envoy publishes a large number of stats that we can scrape and use to track the health of downstream requests through
the proxy. 

Running through these steps over a 15 minute period while sending a significant load to these routes on the proxy 
yielded the following operational dashboards:

> ![](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/solo-io/gloo-ref-arch/blog-30-mar-20/platform/prog-delivery/two-phased-with-os-gloo/perf-test.png)

Reviewer: 1. This image should have an alt attribute.
2. Can you copy the image into the repo so that it's served via the content CDN and the image is in source control?

* Utilizing Gloo's **delegation** feature and Kubernetes **RBAC** to decentralize the configuration management safely
* Fully automating the continuous delivery process by applying **GitOps** principles and using tools like **Flux** to push config to the cluster
* Supporting **hybrid** or **non-Kubernetes** application use-cases by setting up Gloo with a different deployment pattern
* Utilizing **traffic shadowing** to begin testing the new version with realistic data before shifting production traffic to it

## Get Involved in the Gloo Community

Gloo has a large and growing community of open source users, in addition to an enterprise customer base. To learn more about 
Gloo:

* Check out the [repo](https://github.com/solo-io/gloo), where you can see the code and file issues
* Check out the [docs](https://docs.solo.io/gloo/latest), which have an extensive collection of guides and examples
* Join the [slack channel](http://slack.solo.io/) and start chatting with the Solo engineering team and user community

If you'd like to get in touch with me (feedback is always appreciated!), you can find me on Slack or email me at 

> **rick.ducott@solo.io**. 

Reviewer: Which Slack? Solo Slack or Kubernetes Slack? Or both?

Author: Thanks - technically either but I linked to solo slack :D
